---
layout: gitlog
title: initial commit

commit: https://github.com/egorich239/lispm/commit/7e390651c1e586e6987cc0e0e4906b482ed6e7e3
---

Well, not really :-)
But so many repository stories start with this one, that when I decided
to keep a blog in my git log entries for this repository, I could not
resist.

So, what is this blog about?
1. It is about my explorations into a world of implementing a LISP
   virtual machine.
2. It is actually a commit log of this repository, so future lyrics will
   be organized around the code changes: why? how?

I will explain both bullet points in further details.

1. Exploration into LISP VM
---------------------------

It all started last month when a colleague of mine told another
one about the existence of fascinating Brainfuck language. While it is
indeed a fascinating language, my sympathies lay in a different venue.
Namely, I recalled that there was a LISP interpreter fitting into 512
boot sector; and indeed I quickly googled secorlisp [^0].
To explain how I ended up writing my own interpreter, we need to get on
a detour.

One truly mysterious process for me is bootstrapping. Imagine, we have a
new processor architecture, and we would like to port large volume of
the already written code to it. This means, that we need several basic
utilities such as assembler compiler, linker, loader and a compiler of
a higher level language. Well, THE higher level language, in practice.
You absolutely need a C compiler. How do you do it?

A typical way to bootstrap is to take a compiler suite on a different
platform (like your desktop), and cross-compile the basic suite of
utilities to your platform. You might in the process have to write your
own code generator, if your processor is truly knew.

So, we use a large volume of truly amazing software on a different
architecture to produce a binary image, suitable for our platform.
The question that has tingled me for a while regards the minimum amount
of such a binary image.

Getting back to the LISPM: I think the answer is somewhere in the low
kilobytes needed to get a working LISP machine and a minimalistic
runtime routines, allowing to read and write bytes into the machine
memory, and execute native code with its own heap and stack.

And THAT is what I really want to try: bootstrap a good enough C
compiler, to then bootstrap make and binutils.

I need a LISP machine for my purpose. I initially started with
sectorlisp and The Roots of Lisp paper by Paul Graham [^1], and tried to
mend the code to my needs. This turned out to be harder than I thought,
as the code is written in the very minimalistic way, and I also needed
some additional capabilities like integers, which would be challenging
to implement while adhering to the style of that code.

So, I started my own implementation. It's been a great journey up till
now. I've had some mindblowing revelations along the way. Just yesterday
evening I was deeply thoughtful about the nature of recursion. On other
occasions I read chapters of SICP [^2], and generally looked around.
Of course, I have this other page [^3] open :-)

Somewhere along the way I started leaving more and more extended notes
in my personal notebook (the paper one). Then I realized, that it would
be great to write a blog based on these notes. Except, it is tedious to
write a coherent story after the fact based on a couple of notes in the
notebook, and any blog post series would require some means to organize
the writing. Both tasks are much less tempting to me than doing the next
thing I have on the top of my mind.

And then today another revelation came: I've already started paying more
attention to the git log entries in the repository, and started
providing more than just half-assed one-liner non-explanation to a
commit. Why would not I extend it further to make a blog out of it?
It solves both of the challenges mentioned above: it keeps notes in
electronic form, and even more importantly it already _is_ a part of
workflow every time I do `git commit`, which does not fill distruptive
to writing the code, and is the most context-rich environment I have.

And here we are.

2. The actual log
-----------------

This entry is inherently long and not very connected to the changes at
hand, because I needed to explain some history and context. Later
entries will likely be organized very differently.

Since blog can increase publicity of this whole thing, it is good time
to make a basic cleanup: update the README, and provide at least some
testing - github is a public place, and it would be shameful to appear
there not covered with at least rudimentary testing.

So I implemented `testeval.c` that runs through all the tests in
`evaltests/` repository. Those verify that the machine evaluates the way
I expect. In future series I plan to test the actual `lispm.c` code,
although my big dream would be to formally prove its correctness, so
maybe I will make another attempt to Coq [^4] some time later as well :-)


[^0]: https://github.com/jart/sectorlisp
[^1]: https://paulgraham.com/rootsoflisp.html
[^2]: https://mitp-content-server.mit.edu/books/content/sectbyfn/books_pres_0/6515/sicp.zip/full-text/book/book.html
[^3]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Understanding_monads/State
[^4]: https://coq.inria.fr/